---
layout: post
title: Contikey
period: 2017
img: /assets/img/proj-contikey/header-img.jpg
---

Contikey is a social media website for sharing articles about topic you love.

This was a group project for my [Database][istd db] course. Although the focus of the grading was on the database portion, my group wanted to challenge ourselves to build a full-fledged web application using current best practices.

![landing page]{: .fullwidth}

- Frontend Single Page Application built with React + Redux
- Libraries that make development awesome: prettier for enforcing code style, prop-types, styled-components
- REST API built with Django and hosted on AWS
- MariaDB database

I was in charge of **UI design**, all user endpoints and SQL, and part of the React app. I also integrated **Facebook Login** into our application so that users can sign up painlessly, and we can retrieve users' friends from their Facebook account.

## Contikey Features

On Contikey, users can create **channels** on any topic they like. When they find **articles** that they want to share with their friends, they simply need to post the article's link in their channel.

This is my channel for sharing tech-related articles:

![channel view]{: .fullwidth}

<br>
Users can also like and comment on articles shared by others:

![article view]{: .fullwidth}

<br>
On the home page, I can see a "news feed" of articles from my followed channels:

![feed]{: .fullwidth}

<br>
We also implemented notifications, search, explore, user profiles and friends.

This is our database entity-relationship diagram (ERD). For more detailed information on implementation, check out our [github repo][github]!

![erd]{: .fullwidth}

[istd db]: https://istd.sutd.edu.sg/undergraduate/courses/50008-database-management-systems
[landing page]: /assets/img/proj-contikey/landing-fblogin.png
[channel view]: /assets/img/proj-contikey/channel-view.png
[article view]: /assets/img/proj-contikey/article-view.png
[feed]: /assets/img/proj-contikey/feed.png
[github]: https://github.com/stanleynguyen/contikey
[erd]: /assets/img/proj-contikey/ERD.png